Add staking guide to docs (#10609)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/staking/stake-accounts.md

## Stake Account Structure
A stake account on the Solana can be used to delegate tokens to validators on
the network to potentially earn rewards for the owner of the stake account.
Stake accounts are created and managed differently than a traditional wallet

> address, also known as a system account,

Reviewer: That might be more digestible if split into two sentences. "different than a traditional wallet address, known as a system account. A system account can..., whereas a stake account..."

which is only able to send and receive SOL from other accounts on the network.

Stake accounts on Solana also work differently than those of other Proof-of-Stake
blockchain networks that you may be familiar with.  This document describes the
high-level structure and functions of a Solana stake account.

#### Account Address
Each stake account has a unique address which can be used to look up the account
information in the command line or in any network explorer tools.  However,
unlike a wallet address in which the holder of the address's keypair controls
the wallet, the keypair associated with a stake account address does not necessarily have
any control over the account.  In fact, a keypair or private key may not even
exist for a stake account's address.

The only time a stake account's address has a keypair file is when [creating
a stake account using the command line tools](../cli/staking-operations.md#create-a-stake-account),
a new keypair file is created first only to ensure that the stake account's
address is new and unique.

#### Understanding Account Authorities

> Each stake account has two signing authorities specified by their respective address,

Reviewer: Can you introduce the term *authority* first?

The *stake authority* is used to sign transactions for the following operations:
 - Delegating stake
 - Deactivating the stake delegation
 - Splitting the stake account, creating a new stake account with a portion of the
 funds in the first account
 - Merging two undelegated stake accounts into one
 - Setting a new stake authority

The *withdraw authority* signs transactions for the following:
 - Withdrawing un-delegated stake into a wallet address
 - Setting a new withdraw authority
 - Setting a new stake authority

The stake authority and withdraw authority are set when the stake account is
created, and they can be changed to authorize a new signing address at any time.
The stake and withdraw authority can be the same address or two different
addresses.

The withdraw authority keypair holds more control over the account as it is
needed to liquidate the tokens in the stake account, and can be used to reset
the stake authority if the stake authority keypair becomes lost or compromised.

Securing the withdraw authority against loss or theft is of utmost importance
when managing a stake account.

#### Multiple Delegations

> A stake account may only ever be delegated to one validator at a time. All of

Reviewer: A stake account doesn't delegate; it's used to delegate SOL. How about: "Each stake account may only be used to delegate to one validator at a time."

process of becoming delegated or un-delegated.  To delegate a fraction of your
tokens to a validator, or to delegate to multiple validators, you must create
multiple stake accounts.

This can be accomplished by creating multiple stake accounts from a wallet
address containing some tokens, or by creating a single large stake account
and using the stake authority to split the account into multiple accounts
with token balances of your choosing.

The same stake and withdraw authorities can be assigned to multiple
stake accounts.

Two stake accounts that are not delegated and that have the same authorities
and lockup can be merged into a single resulting stake account.

#### Delegation Warmup and Cooldown
When a stake account is delegated, or a delegation is deactivated, the operation
does not take effect immediately.

A delegation or deactivation takes several epochs to complete, with a fraction
of the delegation becoming active or inactive at each epoch boundary after
the transaction containing the instructions has been submitted to the cluster.

There is also a limit on how much total stake can become delegated or

> deactivated in a single epoch, to prevent large sudden changes in stake across

Reviewer: Link to "epoch". This might be the first time the reader has seen that term.

the network as a whole. Since warmup and cooldown are dependent on the behavior

> of other network participants, their exact duration is difficult to predict.

Reviewer: Can you link to a page that shows how to calculate it, if one exists?

## Stake Account Structure
This page describes the details and permissions associated with a stake account.

#### Account Address
Each stake account has a unique address which can be used to look up the account
information in the command line or in any network explorer tools.  However,
unlike a wallet address in which the holder of the address's keypair controls
the wallet, the keypair associated with a stake account address does not have
any control over the account.  In fact, a keypair or private key may not even
exist for a stake account's address.

The only time a stake account's address has a keypair file is when [creating
a stake account using the command line tools](../cli/delegate-stake.md#create-a-stake-account),
a new keypair file is created first only to ensure that the stake account's
address is new and unique.
After the account is created at its address, the keypair file that was used to

> derive the address can be discarded.

Author: Fortunately, that footgun is protected against:
```
$ solana create-stake-account foo.json 0.5 -k foo.json
Error: bad parameter: Identical pubkeys found: `from keypair` and `stake_account` must be unique
```

> derive the address can be discarded.

Author: Oh, I take it back.  This command succeeds:
```
$ solana create-stake-account bar.json 0.5 --stake-authority bar.json --withdraw-authority bar.json -k foo.json
```

the stake authority if the stake authority keypair becomes lost or compromised.

#### Multiple Delegations
A stake account may only ever be delegated to one validator at a time. All of
the tokens in the account are either delegated or un-delegated, or in the
process of becoming delegated or un-delegated.  To delegate a fraction of your
tokens to a validator, or to delegate to multiple validators, you must create
multiple stake accounts.

This can be accomplished by creating multiple stake accounts from a wallet
address containing some tokens, or by creating a single large stake account
and using the stake authority to split the account into multiple accounts
with token balances of your choosing.

Stake and withdraw authority addresses can be assigned to multiple stake accounts.

#### Delegation Warmup and Cooldown
When a stake account is delegated, or a delegation is deactivated, the operation
does not take effect immediately.

A delegation or deactivation takes several epochs to complete, with a fraction
of the delegation becoming active or inactive at each epoch boundary after
the transaction containing the instructions has been submitted to the cluster.

> There is also a limit on how much global stake can become delegated or

Reviewer 2: nits: `global` -> `cluster-wide`? I know this doc doesn't require strongest rigidness.. so `nits:` :)

## Stake Account Structure

> This page describes the details and permissions associated with a stake account.

Author: Not really, I guess I just need a less-lame intro sentence.

tokens to a validator, or to delegate to multiple validators, you must create
multiple stake accounts.

This can be accomplished by creating multiple stake accounts from a wallet
address containing some tokens, or by creating a single large stake account
and using the stake authority to split the account into multiple accounts
with token balances of your choosing.

The same stake and withdraw authorities can be assigned to multiple
stake accounts.

Two stake accounts that are not delegated and that have the same stake and
withdraw authority can be merged into a single resulting stake account.

#### Delegation Warmup and Cooldown
When a stake account is delegated, or a delegation is deactivated, the operation
does not take effect immediately.

A delegation or deactivation takes several epochs to complete, with a fraction
of the delegation becoming active or inactive at each epoch boundary after
the transaction containing the instructions has been submitted to the cluster.

There is also a limit on how much total stake can become delegated or
deactivated in a single epoch, to prevent large sudden changes in stake across

> the network as a whole.

Reviewer 3: We should probably mention that since warmup and cooldown are dependent on the behavior of other network participants, their exact duration is difficult to predict

#### Lockups

> Stake accounts can have a lockup which prevents the withdraw authority on that
> account from withdrawing the tokens before a particular date or epoch has been

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stake accounts can have a lockup which prevents the tokens they hold from being
withdrawn before a particular date or epoch has been
```

Reviewer 3: It feels like the authority horse has been beaten dead by now :laughing:

reached.  While locked up, the stake account can still be delegated, un-delegated,
or split, and its stake and withdraw authorities can be changed as normal.  Only
withdrawal into a wallet address is not allowed.

A lockup can only be added when a stake account is first created, but it can be
modified later, by the *lockup authority* or *custodian*, the address of which

> is set when the account is created.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is also set when the account is created.
```

## Stake Account Structure

> A stake account on the Solana can be used to delegate tokens to validators on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A stake account on Solana can be used to delegate tokens to validators on
```
